# Automated-Clustering-for-Baltimore-Orioles
Villanova M.S. Analytics Project - Automated Clustering for Baltimore Orioles
The Baltimore Orioles collect pitch data for every pitch thrown by Orioles and opposing American League East pitchers.  The pitch data collected includes velocity, horizontal and vertical movement which is utilized to determine the pitch type.  In the current state, Orioles analysts manually pull and analyze each pitcher’s data to determine the number of pitches that each pitcher throws.  This process is tedious and time consuming as pitchers can throw thousands of pitches throughout their careers.  It is also difficult to distinguish pitches, such as two-seam and four-seam fastballs while performing visual cluster analysis.  The organization is seeking a solution to automate this task.
The group researched, applied, and tested several clustering methodologies and approaches prior to agreeing upon the final solution workflow. R code was used to run several clustering methodologies to partition, segment, and recluster the data into more manageable chunks of data to increase cluster accuracy. Techniques, fully disclosed in the remainder of the report, include partitioning pitches by single variable cluster results, adapting a set of rules to start or stop the procedure from unnecessary clustering, and exploration of pitcher handedness. 
The final results of the model are promising. Though the model had a pitch count accuracy score of 55%, we expect that model accuracy can be improved with a better review of the pitcher visual clustering data set used for verifying model accuracy. We are also highly confident in the ability to increase the model accuracy with further model parameter tuning, which would require additional time and resources. 
